Data Quality Control: Different quality controls will be performed on the data before doing any further analysis. Values for PhiX error rate, quality score, and quantity are measured against Illumina quality control thresholds, which are defined in the SOP-043 Sequencing Run Quality Control Parameters. The thresholds for PhiX and quality score are stored in the config table in the LIMS. As acceptable quantity can vary depending on different factors, it is up to the technician to determine if there are quantity issues as part of the quality control process by referring to SOP-043.

1. Quality Confidence (Illumina Quality score): Confidence in base call e.g. 99.8% confidence that a given base call is correct. The threshold set by Illumina is 80% of bases must exceed a quality score of 30 for a standard 100bp run, and 75% for a run of 150bp. If quality does not reach this level, an acceptable reason must be found regarding original sample material or nature of the experiment.

1. Phix control error rate: DNA from virus (PhiX) with an established genome sequence is loaded in each flow cell lane (approximately 0.5%). This allows for the comparison of the PhiX sequences with the reference to count sequencing errors. If this level is well above average, the data from the lane will be failed unless there is a special reason for an exception. The threshold used, and recommended by Illumina for a run of 100bp or less is that a lane should not exceed an average PhiX error rate above 2.5%, and 2% should raise a warning. Warnings are still created when above 2%. If error rate does not stay below this level, an acceptable reason must be found regarding original sample material or nature of the experiment.

2. Quantity: The Bioinformatics Technicians QC check if there is sufficient quantity of data/sequences according to expectations for the libraries and Illumina specifications.

Should initial sample quality or quantity be below amounts we recommend, collaborator must agree to sequencing, and accept possibility of lower quality.

Should reference genome not yet be fully assembled, worse than normal mapping results in terms of % unique alignments or % no match are expected. In well established genomes, if % no match levels are higher than expected, sequences are aligned to the NCBI BLAST database to check for contamination. If contamination is determined to have occurred before arrival at the CNAG, samples are passed. If not, sample preparation is repeated.
